---
layout: post
title: Web 2.0 and Social Media in Enterprises
---

h1. {{ page.title }}
<br>

p(meta). Aug 08 2015 - Helsinki

<br>

As of today, Facebook has a 1.5 billion user base. With the advent of smartphones, social media is now an engrained part of lives of people across different demographic groups. The web and social media has provided a platform to connect anything to anyone. Many enterprises and businesses have seized this platform as an opportunity to enhance collaboration both internally with its employees and externally with its customers and partners. In this essay we discuss Web 2.0 and Social media as a tool to Enterprise, their role in business and effect on the organizations. We also present a few real world cases where Social Media and Web 2.0 have made its impact.

Today ERP 2.0 is the new buzz word in the enterprise world. Before venturing into Enterprise 2.0, let us revisit the legacy ERP systems. The term ERP was coined by Gartner in 1990 which was purely applied to inventory management and manufacturing sectors (Harreld, 2001). The main role of ERP was enterprise optimization, which focused on identifying and effectively using the resources of a manufacturing organization. Later other functions like financials, purchasing, sales and distribution were added to form the core of an ERP system ( Cruz-Cunha et.al, 2011). The processes were strictly internal and hidden from the external customers and partners. The data required was internally generated and consumed ( Cruz-Cunha et.al, 2011). There was very minimal or no integration between these functional systems.

Over the last decade, Enterprises have transformed themselves from being vertically integrated organisations to becoming more agile to fit in the collaborative world. The legacy systems were efficient when businesses were manufacture centric, but with the paradigm shift of enterprises starting to engage in B2B and B2C, they are becoming more partner and customer centric (Bond, 2000). The legacy ERP systems were not designed to handle such a collaboration. A new cross-functional, externally connected, web based system was needed to cope with the new technologies to build multi-channel, connected web-centric business applications (Bond, 2000). This led to the emergence of ERP 2.0. 

Although the term Enterprise 2.0 or ERP 2.0 was introduced by McAfee in 2008 as a way to incorporate social interaction into ERP, social systems and ERP integrations had already been used in SAP and Oracle applications way before ( Cruz-Cunha et.al, 2011). Enterprise 2.0 is developed on top of Web 2.0 to enhance communication by transforming static HTML pages to be dynamic to enable two way interactions (Bruno, 2011). Apart from the technology enablement, enterprise 2.0 benefits organizations to establish freedom, network oriented, less hierarchical structure and a collaborative, trustful and transparent culture ( Cruz-Cunha et.al, 2011). The new dynamic web offered better interactive user interfaces which attracted people to use it more. Most web pages built after 2006 had seamless integrations with discussion forums, Facebook, Google Plus and Twitter connecting an individual’s social account to the web page being viewed. This led to an enormous amount of social interactions over the web. Industry analysts and research firms saw huge potential in the converging social applications like Facebook, Twitter and Youtube, with traditional ERP systems like SAP, Oracle and Microsoft Dynamics. This led to the emergence of Enterprise 2.0 as the next big thing in 2008.

Today when we browse Social media, most enterprises ranging from Fortune 500 to small/medium enterprises have their own Facebook page, Twitter handlers, LinkedIn profile and so on (Shankararaman, 2013). It is not just sufficient for an enterprise to create their presence in socia media. To leverage complete value from social media, they should integrate their business processes and day to day business activities with social media, thus extending their enterprise systems (Shankararaman, 2013). In the next section let us look at some real world implementations of ERP 2.0 in different industries, their value add to the business and effect on the organization (Shankararaman, 2013).

Enterprises use social media mostly for marketing purposes (Kane, 2014). Social media platforms like Facebook, Instagram and Twitter are used as a tool for advertising and communicating to customers. Through social media channels companies get more visibility and are able to build their brand. Some examples of companies with an active social media presence and therefore good brand building are IKEA and especially car brands.

IKEA is an example of using social media (in this case Instagram) not just for advertising, but for sales purposes in a completely new way. The Russian branch of IKEA started to use Instagram as a sales platform, by using the hashtags to link from their main Instagram page to the Instagram page of every product shown (Lepage, 2015). From these pages the user could then get to their main page to buy the product in question. Using Instagram as a web page like this is a great way of social media use. Other companies should also consider this kind of approach to sales. By using tracking tools in the links provided, companies will see how many of their sales come through Instagram and which images attract the most sales. This kind of information can be used by integrating social media with a CRM system (Shankararaman, 2013). The information gathered can then be analyzed and used for gaining knowledge about the customers. Through the integration of social media with CRM it is also possible to have a collaborative relationship with customers, in the development and launch of new products (Shankararaman, 2013).

While most industries are still struggling to effectively use social media to their benefit, Automotive manufacturers have been found to be on top when it comes to creating brand presence on social media (Hendricks, 2015). Social platforms like Facebook and Twitter have become playground for creating brand presence and marketing, by providing custom advertisement spaces to enterprises (Hendricks, 2015). Car brands around the world have used these platforms for creating prospects, leads and converting them into opportunities to increase sales. To a lot of people who use social media to express themselves and share things that they love - cars come as a natural fit (Hendricks, 2015). The human psychological inclinations towards cars have allowed car brands to subtly promote their brands to attract more customers and increase their revenues.The CMO Council report 2014 states that one in four car buyers discuss their purchase experience on social media and around 38% of consumers reported that they will consult social media before buying a car (CMO Council Report, 2014). Also it has been observed that 84% of car shoppers are on Facebook and the number of clicks on Facebook auto ads doubled between October 2012 and April 2013 (CMO Council Report, 2014). Today BMW has close to 19 million likes, which implies that they have 19 million prospective customers and consumers. This might be because of its brand power and compelling visuals, but according to reviews they have a very good customer social help desk answering inquiries and addressing issues, which results in a very low customer attrition (Hendricks, 2015).

There is a lot of potential to use social media also in internal processes (Kane, 2014; Andersson, 2010). Using different types of social media is a good way to communicate within an organization and to increase efficiency within processes. Some enterprises are using already existing social media platforms like Facebook, Twitter and Flowdock this way, but a better way would be to incorporate social media e.g. in an enterprise resource planning system (Andersson, 2010). Having social media incorporated in the enterprise systems like ERP (can be referred to as enterprise 2.0) has many benefits compared to using social media designed for the public (Andersson, 2010).

The company Atos is a good example of switching from email use to an internal collaboration platform to increase the productivity of their employees. In their company it was found that employees spent between five and twenty hours a week reading and writing emails (Morgan, 2014). This lead to the plan of a zero email company, with communication and collaboration being done over a collaboration platform. For a company with 76 000 employees this was a bigendeavour and required a big investment. From 2011 to 2013 the amount of emails had reduced by more than 60%, business results had improved and selling, general and administrative costs had declined (Morgan, 2014). These results at Atos show that the use of enterprise social media has had a positive impact on productivity.

One of the reasons to use enterprise 2.0 instead of existing public platforms is security. In enterprise 2.0 it is much easier to control the data and who has the right to access the data. Additionally it is possible to more easily track information that has been shared. The information security within an ERP system is also much better than on a publically available platform. This is particularly important, if the information shared is operationally critical for the organization. With enterprise social media the control over the data shared remains within the organization.

Another reason to use enterprise 2.0 instead of public social media platforms is to keep the communication professional. When the social media is corporated into an enterprise system, the content shared is more likely to stay focused on business related information. This makes people use their time more effectively and productively. Through enterprise social media channels it is also easier and therefore more likely for people to keep up to date with changes within the enterprise. Additionally people can share information with each other in a more efficient way. When knowledge and data is stored this way, less information is lost e.g. when a person leaves the company.

Wikis are a good way of documenting how the enterprise systems are used, as the processes evolve and change. When wikis are updated as the processes and ways to do things evolve, it is possible to trace back changes and reasons for these changes. A lot of time can be saved by storing information in an easily accessible way (Kane, 2014). People don’t need to spend a lot of time on trying to find information. These kinds of channels also make it easier for new employees to look up information, so they don’t have to ask someone for help on all small matters. It is also important to use enterprise 2.0 for different kinds of communication. Wikis are a good way asynchronous communication (Andersson, 2010). Enterprise social media should have these kinds of channels, as well as synchronous communication tools, i.e. real time chat functions of some kind. This way it is easy to ask quick questions of one or two people, but if more questions exist or there is need for more detailed information it is easy to look up the information in a wiki.

Looking at the bright side, even though the value of social media increases with the number of user base it has, it cannot be overlooked how enterprises have used this platform to monetise and sustain as leading brands. Plenty of industry's ventures of social ERP have resulted in success stories. A paradigm shift can be observed in the way enterprises interact with their customers. As a result there is higher employee and customer engagement, which helps in providing better tools for the employees internally, as well as enhancing the customer satisfaction through better communication (Seddon, 2005). Social media integrations with ERP systems have brought in a lot of innovation in the traditional business processes. These business processes aim to maximise the revenues with efficient control over the enterprise resources. Lastly there is a lot of data available from social media that helps enterprises to make better decision through prediction markets(Seddon, 2005). There is no doubt that Enterprise 2.0 has given organizations a competitive edge in the markets, but it has had a few hurdles. The transition from ERP to ERP 2.0 is tedious. There are always high risks of project cost overruns and missed deadlines (Zrimsek, 2001). The integration of existing ERP to social media would require additional skill sets and will lead to additional costs for the organisations.(Rauniar, 2014) In some cases, the social media Technology Acceptance Model shows concerns related to security and privacy of customer data. This might affect the Laggard portion of the customer base in an organization.

In a press release, Gartner, Inc. says that 80% of businesses using social media will not be as fruitful as expected till the end of 2015 due to inadequate leadership and overemphasis on technology.Gartner also outlined two key predictions around social and Enterprise collaboration:
- By 2016, 50 percent of large organizations will have internal Facebook-like social networks, and that 30 percent of these will be considered  as essential as email and telephones are today.
- In 2017, the majority of all new user-facing applications will exhibit gamified-social-mobile fusion.
(Source : Social and Collaboration Trends to be Discussed at the Gartner Portals, Content & Collaboration Summit 2013).

Using social media for marketing and advertising purposes is a small step for a company, but in today’s world an essential part of getting visibility on the market. It is a small effort for companies to start using existing platforms for this purpose. Enterprise 2.0 on the other hand requires much more of a company, like bigger internal changes for integration of a system and big investments. These changes however are a change into a more productive and effective way of time use and communication. We know that social media and Web 2.0 has brought a tremendous wave of change in the way enterprises work, but we can only assume this is just the beginning. With the speed at which innovation and development of technology happening in various industries, we can confidently say that Web 2.0 and Social Media in Enterprises will revolutionize businesses across the world.


<u><b>References:</b></u>

Andersson, David. Selecting ERP for Enterprise 2.0 and Social Media Functionality. IFS White paper, 2010.

Bond, B., et al. ERP is dead–Long live ERP II. Gartner Group, New York, 2000. SPA-12-0420 Bruno, Giorgio, et al. Key challenges for enabling agile BPM with social software. Journal of Software Maintenance and Evolution: Research and Practice, 2011, 23.4: 297-326. DOI: 10.1002/smr.523

CMO Council 2014, State of Marketing 2014 Report, CMO Council. Available at: http://www.cmocouncil.org/download-success.php?id=283&doc=summary

Cruz-Cunha, Maria Manuela, Joao Varajao, Philip Powell, Ricardo Martinho, 2011, ENTERprise Information Systems: International Conference. CENTERIS 2011, Vilamoura, Algarve, Portugal,October 5-7, 2011. Proceedings, Part 1

Harreld, Heather, 2001 “Extended ERP reborn in b-to-b”. Computer World, 27.8.2001. Available at: http://www.computerworld.com/article/2583660/e-commerce/extended-erp-technology-reborn-in-b2b.html

Hendricks, Drew. A Look At How Car Brands Are Effectively Using Social Media. Forbes, 9.4.2015. Available at: http://www.forbes.com/sites/drewhendricks/2015/04/09/a-look-at-how-car-brands-are-effectively-using-social-media/

Kane, Gerald C. Enterprise Social Media: Current Capabilities and Future Possibilities. Agenda, 2014, 38.1: 275-304. ISSN 1540-1960

Lepage, E. What Social Network To Focus On in 2015, By Industry. Blog, 2015. Available at: http://blog.hootsuite.com/what-social-network-to-focus-on-in-2015-by-industry/

Mann, Jeffrey, et al. Predicts 2013: Social and Collaboration Go Deeper and Wider. Gartner Inc. report, 2012. Available at: https://www.gartner.com/doc/2254316/predicts--social-collaboration-deeper

Morgan, J. How This Company Is Trying To Eradicate Email. Forbes 29.9.2014. Available at: http://www.forbes.com/sites/jacobmorgan/2014/09/29/how-this-company-is-trying-to-eradicate-email/

Rauniar, Rupak, et al. Technology acceptance model (TAM) and social media usage: an empirical study on Facebook. Journal of Enterprise Information Management, 2014, 27.1: 6-30. ISSN: 1741-0398

Shankararaman, Venky and LUM, Eng Kit. Integration of Social Media Technologies with ERP:A Prototype Implementation. (2013). Proceedings of the Nineteenth Americas Conference on Information Systems. , 11. Research Collection School Of Information Systems. Available at: http://ink.library.smu.edu.sg/sis_research/2043

Zrimsek, Brian, et al. Estimating the time and cost of ERP and ERP II projects: A 10-step process. Gartner: Strategic Analysis Report: R-14, 2001, 5140. Available at: https://www.gartner.com/doc/341315/estimating-time-cost-erp-erp

Seddon, B Peter, 2005, Are ERP systems a source of competitive advantage?, Research Gate, available from :http://www.researchgate.net/publication/229619662_Are_ERP_systems_a_source_of_competitive_advantage
